# LIBRARY-MANAGEMENT-SYSTEM-L_I_B_R_A-
1-Project Title
“Library Management System (L_I_B_R_A)” The “Library Management System” has been developed to override the problems prevailing in the practicing manual system. This software is supported to eliminate and in some cases reduce the hardship faced by this existing system. Moreover this system is designed for the particular need of the institution to carry out operating in a smooth and effective manner. 2-Domain Library management institutional management non-profitable organization. 3-Problem of Statement In our existing system all the transaction of books are done manually, so taking more time for a transaction like borrowing a book or returning a book and also for searching of member and books. Another major disadvantage is that to preparing the list of book borrowed and the available book in the library will take more time, currently it is doing as a day process for verifying all records. So after conducting he feasibility study we decided to make the manual library management system to be computerised. Proposed system is an automated library management system. Through our software user can add member, edit information, borrow and return books in quick time. Some of the problems being faced in faced in manual system are as follows: • Fast report generation is not possible. • Tracing a book is difficult. • Information about issue/return of the books is not properly maintained. • No central database can be created as information is not available in database. All the manual difficulty in managing the Library have been rectified by implementing computerization. This application is reduced as much as possible to avoid errors while entering the data. It also provides error message while entering invalid data. No, formal knowledge is needed for the user to use this system. Thus by this all it is user-friendly. Library Management System as described above can lead error free, secure, reliable and fast management system. It can assist the user to concentrate on other activities rather to concentrate on the record keeping. Thus it will help organisation in better utilization of resources. So that’s why I can choose this topic to make it simple.    is a sub-discipline of issues faced by libraries and library management professionals. Library management encompasses normal managerial tasks, as well as intellectual that focuses on specific freedom and fundraising responsibilities. Issues faced in library management frequently overlap with those faced in managing    Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 5 of 16 TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  4-Project Description The software to be produced is on Library Management System. A library card will also be provided to the customers who visit daily. A person can also borrow the book for particular days. All the information will be entered in the system. If the person doesn’t return the due book. Admin has the authority to add, delete or modify the details of the book available to/from the system. He also has the authority to provide username and password for the receptionist. He can also add the details of the book purchased from shops along with the shop name.       Project plan Requirement Design Process description implementation     STATE DIAGRAM : LIBRARIAN OBJECT   Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 6 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  4.1-Scope of the Work This project is helpful to track all the book and library information and to rate the maximum number of books, the students wished to allot books. The software will be able to handle all the necessary information related to the library. From a librarian perspective, the Library Management System Project enhanced searchable database for the search books, managing library members, issuing and receiving books . • Search Books, Managing Library Members, Issuing and Receiving Books: An enhanced atomized system is developed to maintain Books, Authors, Issuing and Receiving Books and maintain the history of transaction. • To utilize resources in an efficient manner by increasing their productivity through automation. • It satisfies the user requirement.    Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 7 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  4.2-Project Modules • Books: This module consist the details of the books available in library and their categories.     Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 8 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  • Member Account details To issue an book from the library, one should have a account in the library. The registration contains all the details about the member like registration number, name, address, contact number etc..  • Book Request: This module is used by the member to request a book from the library. The search can be performed by using name of the book, author name, and subject name.   Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 9 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  • Issue of books: This module is used by the librarian to issue a book based on the request made by the members. • Returning Books: In this module the librarian maintains the details of the books returned by the member, which also includes the fine details, damage book details, lost book details.  • History: In this module the member can view the details about the previous issued books, requested books and returned books etc. • Reports: This module includes the details about the issued books, returned books, member reports, fine reports, or any damage to the book or details of the book which are not returned.  Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 10 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  5-Implementation Methodology In this I am trying to give an Idea of “How I can implement the library management system” .   FUNCTIONAL DECOMPOSITION OF LIBRARY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM    CLASS DIAGRAM OF LIBRARY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM   Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 11 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.   DFD OF LIBRARY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM   ER DIAGRAM OF LIBRARY MANAGEMENT SYSYTEM   Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 12 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.      DATABASE OF LIBRARY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM   Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 13 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  6-Technologies to be used 6.1 -Software Platform a) Front-end ----python (3.8) ----tk-inter (GUI) b) Back-end -----sqlite (database) 6.2 -Hardware Platform RAM — 8 GB Hard Disk — not used OS — Mac OS (Mojave-10.14.6) Editor — idle (Available with python package) Processor — 1.8 GHz intel core i5 6.3 -Tools No tool used. 7-Advantages of this Project Our proposed system has the following advantages. User friendly interface Fast access to database Less error More storage capacity Search facility Look and feel environment Quick transaction 8-Future Scope and further enhancement of the Project o In future we can make this application online so that members will be able to search the book from any places as well as can send book request. o Book reading facility can be provided through on-line. o In the area of data security and system security. o Provide more online tips and help. o Implementation of ISBN BAR code reader                  Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 14 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  9-Project Repository Location       S#       Project Artifacts (softcopy)    Location      Verified by Project Guide      Verified by Lab In-Charge     1.  Project Synopsis Report (Final Version) https://s.docworkspace.com/d/AEsSC- 7eqLpR6Z6S_OSdFA     Tushar mehrotra  Name and Signature      2.       Project Progress updates         Name and Signature      Name and Signature     3.  Project Requirement specifications   Name and Signature  Name and Signature      4.       Project Report (Final Version)         Name and Signature      Name and Signature     5.     Test Repository      Name and Signature    Name and Signature     6.     Any other document, give details      Name and Signature     Name and Signature   10-Team Details       Project Name     Course Name     Student ID      Student Name      Role        Signature      LIBRARY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM                    INDUSTRIAL TRAINING(PYTHON) (ECS 509)   TCA1809026  UTTKARSH PARMAR  Developer                                                                    
11-Conclusion
“Library Management System” allows the user to store the book details and the customer details. This software package allows storing the details of all the data related to library. The system is strong enough to withstand regressive yearly operations under conditions where the   Title: L_I_B_R_A Page 15 of 16  TMU-CCSIT Version 1.  database is maintained and cleared over a certain time of span. The implementation of the system in the organization will considerably reduce data entry, time and also provide readily calculated reports. 12-References • Website http://www.wikipedia.com http://www.sololearn.com And also my mentor from Ducat (Noida) • Book Python-basic-handbook ( writer- vivek Krishnamoorthy, jay Parmar, mario pisa pena)
